# Overview
This is an attempt to utilize <a href="https://github.com/JensRestemeier/EdifTests">JensRestemeier/EdifTests "edif2dot.py" script</a> and <a href="https://byuccl.github.io/spydrnet/">Spydrnet</a> to generate an visualization from an EDIF file generated by the Atmel CPLD fitter for the ATF150x chips.
There are currently some minor issues in Spydrnet which prevent it from parsing files from the Atmel Fitter. See https://github.com/byuccl/spydrnet/issues/215 for more information. These changes appear to be slated for integration into the Fall 2023 release.

Since Spydrnet can trivially convert EDIF to Verilog, included <code>edif2v.py</code> is an example of how to get Spydrnet to do this.

# Requirements
You will need spydrnet and graphviz for python. As of 10/24/23, spydrnet needs to be from the next_release branch as some more recent changes are necessary to support these EDIF files:
<code>
git clone -b next_release https://github.com/byuccl/spydrnet.git
cd spydrnet
pip install .
</code>

Otherwise, if the fall_release changes have been widely deployed, this might be sufficient in the future:
<code>
pip install spydrnet
sudo apt-get install python3-graphviz
</code>

# Usage
In order to get EDIF out of the Atmel fitter, you might want to include the following in your .PLD file if you are working in CUPL. You can then expect to find a .EDN file after the fitter runs:
<code>
PROPERTY ATMEL { out_edif=on };
</code>


Next, make sure your EDIF file uses the correct timestamp format. You can use this utility to modify it:
<code>
ediftimestamp.sh yourfile.edn
</code>

# Broken Test case (EDIF generated by Atmel Fitter)
edif2dot.py ediftest.edn

# Working test case
edif2dot.py minimal.edf